Dear Lee Sael and Hwanjo Yu,

I read with great interest your recent manuscript in Bioinformatics, A Mutation Profile for Top-k Patient Search Exploiting Gene-Ontology and Orthogonal Non-negative Matrix Factorization (http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv409, attached). 

However, as I read the manuscript, one detail troubled me, and that was the generation of the final "gene2go" matrix, wherein (quoting): 

> To reduce the term correlation, we use only the most specific terms, i.e. the leaf 

> node term after propagating the scores of the non-leaf terms down to the leaf node 

> terms. This approach also resolves the problem of evaluating genes annotated with 

> general term as the effect of the gene of function identification is spread out over 

> several leaf node terms.

This is troubling, because in my experience, it is only possible to "propagate" from specific to less specific terms (children to parents) due to the "true path rule" (GO consortium, 2001, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC311077/):

> The pathway from a child term to its top-level parent(s) must always be true.

This is possible because the GO is a directed graph, and it is directional because it is not a tree.

Based on this statement, I decided to run an investigation as to what was actually happening in the code and what gene-GO annotations were being generated. This report is attached as a PDF, and is also available on github (https://github.com/rmflight/go_onmf). 

As you can see from the example of A2M, genes are being annotated with child terms that are not direct annotations, and do not fit the true path rule.

I do believe that the mutation profile method would still work using a subset of GO term annotations such as those in GO slims.

I would appreciate any feedback you can provide on my analysis, including issues or pull requests on the github repo.

I also hope that you see the seriousness of this issue (assuming I have not made an error in my analysis), and how GO term annotations can be used.

Regards,

Robert

Robert M Flight, PhD
Bioinformatics Research Associate
Resource Center for Stable Isotope Resolved Metabolomics
Markey Cancer Center
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY

Twitter: @rmflight
Web: rmflight.github.io
ORCID: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8141-7788
EM rflight79@gmail.com
PH 502-509-1827

To call in the statistician after the experiment is done may be no more than asking him to perform a post-mortem examination: he may be able to say what the experiment died of. - Ronald Fisher
